content/articles/mean-field-variational-bayes.md, before:

Title: Foo Bar
Date: 2018-11-23 10:00
Author: Will Wolf
Lang: en
Slug: mean-field-variational-bayes
Status: published
Summary:
Image: figures/.png

"Mean-field variational Bayes" (MFVB), is similar to [expectation-maximization]({filename}../content/em-for-lda.md) (EM), yet distinct in two key ways:

1. We do not minimize $\text{KL}\big(q(\mathbf{Z})\Vert p(\mathbf{Z}\vert\mathbf{X}, \theta)\big)$, i.e. perform the E-step, as [in the problems in which we employ mean-field] the posterior distribution $p(\mathbf{Z}\vert\mathbf{X}, \theta)$ "is too complex to work with," e.g. it has no analytical form.
2. Our variational distribution $q(\mathbf{Z})$ is a *factorized distribution*, i.e.

$$
q(\mathbf{Z}) = \prod\limits_i^{M} q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)
$$

for all latent variables $\mathbf{Z}_i$.

Briefly, factorized distributions are cheaper to compute: if each $q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)$ is Gaussian, $q(\mathbf{Z})$ requires optimization of $2M$ parameters (a mean and a variance for each factor); conversely, a non-factorized $q(\mathbf{Z}) = \text{Normal}(\mu, \Sigma)$ would require optimization of $M(1 + M)$ parameters ($M$ for the mean, and $M^2$ for the covariance). Following intuition, this gain in computational efficiency comes at the cost of decreased accuracy in approximating the true posterior over latent variables.

## So, what is it?

Mean-field variational Bayes is an iterative maximization of the ELBO. More precisely, it is an iterative M-step with respect to the variational factors $q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)$.

In the simplest case, we posit a variational factor over every latent variable, *as well as every parameter*. In other words, as compared to the log-marginal decomposition in EM, $\theta$ is absorbed into $\mathbf{Z}$.

$$
\log{p(\mathbf{X}\vert\theta)} = \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{\frac{p(\mathbf{X, Z}\vert\theta)}{q(\mathbf{Z})}}\bigg] + \text{KL}\big(q(\mathbf{Z})\Vert p(\mathbf{Z}\vert\mathbf{X}, \theta)\big)\quad \text{(EM)}
$$

becomes

$$
\log{p(\mathbf{X})} = \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{\frac{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}{q(\mathbf{Z})}}\bigg] + \text{KL}\big(q(\mathbf{Z})\Vert p(\mathbf{Z}\vert\mathbf{X})\big)\quad \text{(MFVB)}
$$

From there, we simply maximize the ELBO, i.e. $\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{\frac{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}{q(\mathbf{Z})}}\bigg]$, by iteratively *maximizing with respect to each individual variational factor $q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)$* in turn.

## What's this do?

Curiously, we note that $\log{p(\mathbf{X})}$ is a *fixed quantity* with respect to $q(\mathbf{Z})$: updating our variational factors *will not change* the marginal log-likelihood of our data.

This said, we note that the ELBO and $\text{KL}\big(q(\mathbf{Z})\Vert p(\mathbf{Z}\vert\mathbf{X})\big)$ trade off linearly: when one goes up by $\Delta$, the other goes down by $\Delta$.

As such, (iteratively) maximizing the ELBO in MFVB is akin to minimizing the divergence between the true posterior over the latent variables given data and our factorized variational approximation thereof.

## Derivation

So, what do these updates look like?

First, let's break the ELBO into its two main components:

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{\frac{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}{q(\mathbf{Z})}}\bigg]
&= \int{q(\mathbf{Z})\log{\frac{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}{q(\mathbf{Z})}}}d\mathbf{Z}\\
&= \int{q(\mathbf{Z})\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}}d\mathbf{Z} - \int{q(\mathbf{Z})\log{q(\mathbf{Z})}}d\mathbf{Z}\\
&= A + B
\end{align*}
$$

Next, rewrite this expression in a way that isolates a single variational factor $q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)$, i.e. the factor with respect to which we'd like to maximize the ELBO in a given iteration.

Starting with the first term:

$$
\begin{align*}
A
&= \int{q(\mathbf{Z})\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}d\mathbf{Z}}\\
&= \int{\prod\limits_{i}q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}d\mathbf{Z}_i}\\
&= \int{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)\bigg[\int{\prod\limits_{i \neq j}q_i(\mathbf{Z}_{i})\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}}d\mathbf{Z}_i\bigg]}d\mathbf{Z}_j\\
&= \int{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j){ \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}] }d\mathbf{Z}_j}\\
\end{align*}
$$

Following Bishop^[1]'s derivation, we introduce the notation:

$$
\int{\prod\limits_{i \neq j}q_i(\mathbf{Z}_{i})\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}}d\mathbf{Z}_i = \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]
$$

A few things to note, and in case this looks strange:

- Were the left-hand side to read $\int{q(\mathbf{Z})\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}}d\mathbf{Z}$, this would look like the perfectly vanilla expectation $\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]$.
- An expectation maps a function $f$, e.g. $\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}$, to a single real number. As our expression reads $\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]$ as opposed to $\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]$, we're conspicuously unable to integrate over the remaining factor $q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)$; **as such, $\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]$ gives a function of the value of $\mathbf{Z}_j$.**

Some toy Python code is further illustrative:

```python
# Suppose `Z = [Z_1, Z_2, Z_3]`, with corresponding probability distributions `q_1`, `q_2`, `q_3`:

# pseudo expectation

q_0 = [
    (1, .2),
    (2, .3),
    (3, .5)
]

q_1 = [
    (4, .3),
    (5, .3),
    (6, .4)
]

q_2 = [
    (7, .7),
    (8, .2),
    (9, .1)
]

dists = (q_0, q_1, q_2)

# Suppose j = 2
j = 2
```

$\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]$, written `E_i_neq_j_log_p_X_Z` below, can be understood as:

```python
def E_i_neq_j_log_p_X_Z(Z_j):

    E = 0
    Z_i_neq_j_dists = [dist for i, dist in enumerate(dists) if i != j]

    for comb in product(*Z_i_neq_j_dists):
        Z = []
        prob = 0
        comb = list(comb)
        for i in range(len(dists)):
            if i == j:
                Z.append(Z_j)
            else:
                Z_i, p = comb.pop(0)
                Z.append(Z_i)
                if prob == 0:
                    prob = p
                else:
                    prob *= p
        E += prob * ln_p_X_Z(X, Z)

    return E
```

Next, it was not immediately obvious to me how and why we're able to introduce a second integral sign on line 3 of the derivation above. Notwithstanding, the reason is quite simple; a simple exercise of nested for-loops is illustrative.

Before beginning, we remind the definition of an integral, in code. In the simplest example, $\int{ydx}$ can be written as:

```python
x = np.linspace(lower_lim, upper_lim, n_ticks)

integral = sum([y * dx for dx in x])
```

With this in mind, the following confirms the self-evidence of the second integral sign:

```python
TOTAL = 74.8
X = np.array([10, 20, 30])


def ln_p_X_Z(X, Z):
    return (X + Z).sum()  # dummy expression


# With one integral sign
total = 0
for Z_0 in q_0:
    for Z_1 in q_1:
        for Z_2 in q_2:
            val_z_0, prob_z_0 = Z_0
            val_z_1, prob_z_1 = Z_1
            val_z_2, prob_z_2 = Z_2
            Z = np.array([val_z_0, val_z_1, val_z_2])
            total += prob_z_0 * prob_z_1 * prob_z_2 * ln_p_X_Z(X, Z)


assert total == TOTAL


# With two integral signs
total = 0
for Z_0 in q_0:
    _total = 0
    val_z_0, prob_z_0 = Z_0
    for Z_1 in q_1:
        for Z_2 in q_2:
            val_z_1, prob_z_1 = Z_1
            val_z_2, prob_z_2 = Z_2
            Z = np.array([val_z_0, val_z_1, val_z_2])
            _total += prob_z_1 * prob_z_2 * ln_p_X_Z(X, Z)
    total += prob_z_0 * _total


assert total == TOTAL
```

In effect, isolating $q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)$ is akin to multiplying penultimate line, i.e. multiplying this probability by an intermediate summation.  Therefore, the second integral sign is akin `_total += prob_z_1 * prob_z_2 * ln_p_X_Z(X, Z)`, i.e. the mechanism that computes this intermediate summation itself.

## second term

we note that this is the entropy of the full variational joint

$$
\begin{align*}
B
&= - \int{q(\mathbf{Z})\log{q(\mathbf{Z})}}d\mathbf{Z}\\
&= - \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg]\\
&= - \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{\prod\limits_{i}q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)}\bigg]\\
&= - \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\sum\limits_{i}\log{q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)}\bigg]\\
&= - \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)} + \sum\limits_{i \neq j}\log{q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)}\bigg]\\
&= - \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}\bigg] - \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\sum\limits_{i \neq j}\log{q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)}\bigg]\\
&= - \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}\bigg[\log{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}\bigg] - \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q_{i \neq j}(\mathbf{Z}_i)}\bigg[\sum\limits_{i \neq j}\log{q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)}\bigg]\\
&= - \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}\bigg[\log{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}\bigg] + \text{const}\\
&= - \int{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)\log{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}}d\mathbf{Z}_j + \text{const}\\
\end{align*}
$$

## Putting it back together

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{\frac{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}{q(\mathbf{Z})}}\bigg]
&= A + B\\
&= \int{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j){ \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}] }d\mathbf{Z}_j} - \int{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)\log{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}}d\mathbf{Z}_j + \text{const}\\
\end{align*}
$$

It would be great if we could remove the expectation, since we'd then have a (negative) KL divergence!

Acknowledging that the $\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]$ in the integrand is an unnormalized log-likelihood written as a function of $\mathbf{Z}_j$, we temporarily rewrite it as:

$$
\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}] = \log{\tilde{p}(\mathbf{X}, \mathbf{Z}_j})
$$

Then:

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{\frac{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}{q(\mathbf{Z})}}\bigg]
&= \int{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j){ \log{\tilde{p}(\mathbf{X}, \mathbf{Z}_j}) }d\mathbf{Z}_j} - \int{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)\log{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}}d\mathbf{Z}_j + \text{const}\\
&= \int{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j){ \log{\frac{\tilde{p}(\mathbf{X}, \mathbf{Z}_j)}{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}} }d\mathbf{Z}_j} + \text{const}\\
&= - \text{KL}\big(q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)\Vert \tilde{p}(\mathbf{X}, \mathbf{Z}_j)\big) + \text{const}\\
\end{align*}
$$

Finally, this expression, i.e. the ELBO, reaches its minimum when:

$$
\begin{align*}
q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)
&= \tilde{p}(\mathbf{X}, \mathbf{Z}_j)\\
&= \exp{\bigg(\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]\bigg)}
\end{align*}
$$

NB: When actually applying mean-field, we are computing this expression analytically. *Therefore, to "obtain the optimal density function," we effectively strive to recognize our result as of the form of some canonical density function, along with its parameters.*

Furthermore, we note that this density function is not necessarily normalized. "By inspection," we compute:

$$
\begin{align*}
q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)
&= \frac{\exp{\bigg(\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]\bigg)}}{\int{\exp{\bigg(\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]\bigg)}d\mathbf{Z}_j}}\\
&= \exp{\bigg(\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]\bigg)} + \text{const}\\
\end{align*}
$$

So, finally, to work with the log:

$$
\begin{align*}
\log{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}
&= \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}] + \text{const}\\
\end{align*}
$$

# Approximating a Gaussian

Remember, maximizing the ELBO (which we do by minimizing the KL divergence between  $q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)$ and $\tilde{p}(\mathbf{X}, \mathbf{Z}_j)$ for all factors $j$) is our mechanism for minimizing the KL divergence between the full factorized posterior $q(\mathbf{Z})$ and the true posterior $p(\mathbf{Z}\vert\mathbf{X})$.

Reread this. Let it sink in!

![png]({filename}/figures/mean-field-variational-bayes/mv-gaussian-approx-1.png)

![png]({filename}/figures/mean-field-variational-bayes/mv-gaussian-approx-2.png)

![png]({filename}/figures/mean-field-variational-bayes/mv-gaussian-approx-3.png)

## Code
The [repository](https://github.com/cavaunpeu/boltzmann-machines) and [rendered notebook](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/cavaunpeu/boltzmann-machines/blob/master/boltzmann-machines-part-2.ipynb) for this project can be found at their respective links.

## References
[^1]: @book{Goodfellow-et-al-2016,
    title={Deep Learning},
    author={Ian Goodfellow and Yoshua Bengio and Aaron Courville},
    publisher={MIT Press},
    note={\url{http://www.deeplearningbook.org}},
    year={2016}
}
[^2]: [Adversarial Contrastive Estimation](https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.03642)

Commit message:

add section about normalization constant

content/articles/mean-field-variational-bayes.md, after:

Title: Foo Bar
Date: 2018-11-23 10:00
Author: Will Wolf
Lang: en
Slug: mean-field-variational-bayes
Status: published
Summary:
Image: figures/.png

"Mean-field variational Bayes" (MFVB), is similar to [expectation-maximization]({filename}../content/em-for-lda.md) (EM), yet distinct in two key ways:

1. We do not minimize $\text{KL}\big(q(\mathbf{Z})\Vert p(\mathbf{Z}\vert\mathbf{X}, \theta)\big)$, i.e. perform the E-step, as [in the problems in which we employ mean-field] the posterior distribution $p(\mathbf{Z}\vert\mathbf{X}, \theta)$ "is too complex to work with," e.g. it has no analytical form.
2. Our variational distribution $q(\mathbf{Z})$ is a *factorized distribution*, i.e.

$$
q(\mathbf{Z}) = \prod\limits_i^{M} q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)
$$

for all latent variables $\mathbf{Z}_i$.

Briefly, factorized distributions are cheaper to compute: if each $q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)$ is Gaussian, $q(\mathbf{Z})$ requires optimization of $2M$ parameters (a mean and a variance for each factor); conversely, a non-factorized $q(\mathbf{Z}) = \text{Normal}(\mu, \Sigma)$ would require optimization of $M(1 + M)$ parameters ($M$ for the mean, and $M^2$ for the covariance). Following intuition, this gain in computational efficiency comes at the cost of decreased accuracy in approximating the true posterior over latent variables.

## So, what is it?

Mean-field variational Bayes is an iterative maximization of the ELBO. More precisely, it is an iterative M-step with respect to the variational factors $q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)$.

In the simplest case, we posit a variational factor over every latent variable, *as well as every parameter*. In other words, as compared to the log-marginal decomposition in EM, $\theta$ is absorbed into $\mathbf{Z}$.

$$
\log{p(\mathbf{X}\vert\theta)} = \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{\frac{p(\mathbf{X, Z}\vert\theta)}{q(\mathbf{Z})}}\bigg] + \text{KL}\big(q(\mathbf{Z})\Vert p(\mathbf{Z}\vert\mathbf{X}, \theta)\big)\quad \text{(EM)}
$$

becomes

$$
\log{p(\mathbf{X})} = \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{\frac{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}{q(\mathbf{Z})}}\bigg] + \text{KL}\big(q(\mathbf{Z})\Vert p(\mathbf{Z}\vert\mathbf{X})\big)\quad \text{(MFVB)}
$$

From there, we simply maximize the ELBO, i.e. $\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{\frac{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}{q(\mathbf{Z})}}\bigg]$, by iteratively *maximizing with respect to each individual variational factor $q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)$* in turn.

## What's this do?

Curiously, we note that $\log{p(\mathbf{X})}$ is a *fixed quantity* with respect to $q(\mathbf{Z})$: updating our variational factors *will not change* the marginal log-likelihood of our data.

This said, we note that the ELBO and $\text{KL}\big(q(\mathbf{Z})\Vert p(\mathbf{Z}\vert\mathbf{X})\big)$ trade off linearly: when one goes up by $\Delta$, the other goes down by $\Delta$.

As such, (iteratively) maximizing the ELBO in MFVB is akin to minimizing the divergence between the true posterior over the latent variables given data and our factorized variational approximation thereof.

## Derivation

So, what do these updates look like?

First, let's break the ELBO into its two main components:

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{\frac{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}{q(\mathbf{Z})}}\bigg]
&= \int{q(\mathbf{Z})\log{\frac{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}{q(\mathbf{Z})}}}d\mathbf{Z}\\
&= \int{q(\mathbf{Z})\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}}d\mathbf{Z} - \int{q(\mathbf{Z})\log{q(\mathbf{Z})}}d\mathbf{Z}\\
&= A + B
\end{align*}
$$

Next, rewrite this expression in a way that isolates a single variational factor $q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)$, i.e. the factor with respect to which we'd like to maximize the ELBO in a given iteration.

Starting with the first term:

$$
\begin{align*}
A
&= \int{q(\mathbf{Z})\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}d\mathbf{Z}}\\
&= \int{\prod\limits_{i}q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}d\mathbf{Z}_i}\\
&= \int{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)\bigg[\int{\prod\limits_{i \neq j}q_i(\mathbf{Z}_{i})\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}}d\mathbf{Z}_i\bigg]}d\mathbf{Z}_j\\
&= \int{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j){ \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}] }d\mathbf{Z}_j}\\
\end{align*}
$$

Following Bishop^[1]'s derivation, we introduce the notation:

$$
\int{\prod\limits_{i \neq j}q_i(\mathbf{Z}_{i})\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}}d\mathbf{Z}_i = \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]
$$

A few things to note, and in case this looks strange:

- Were the left-hand side to read $\int{q(\mathbf{Z})\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}}d\mathbf{Z}$, this would look like the perfectly vanilla expectation $\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]$.
- An expectation maps a function $f$, e.g. $\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}$, to a single real number. As our expression reads $\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]$ as opposed to $\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]$, we're conspicuously unable to integrate over the remaining factor $q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)$; **as such, $\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]$ gives a function of the value of $\mathbf{Z}_j$.**

Some toy Python code is further illustrative:

```python
# Suppose `Z = [Z_1, Z_2, Z_3]`, with corresponding probability distributions `q_1`, `q_2`, `q_3`:

# pseudo expectation

q_0 = [
    (1, .2),
    (2, .3),
    (3, .5)
]

q_1 = [
    (4, .3),
    (5, .3),
    (6, .4)
]

q_2 = [
    (7, .7),
    (8, .2),
    (9, .1)
]

dists = (q_0, q_1, q_2)

# Suppose j = 2
j = 2
```

$\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]$, written `E_i_neq_j_log_p_X_Z` below, can be understood as:

```python
def E_i_neq_j_log_p_X_Z(Z_j):

    E = 0
    Z_i_neq_j_dists = [dist for i, dist in enumerate(dists) if i != j]

    for comb in product(*Z_i_neq_j_dists):
        Z = []
        prob = 0
        comb = list(comb)
        for i in range(len(dists)):
            if i == j:
                Z.append(Z_j)
            else:
                Z_i, p = comb.pop(0)
                Z.append(Z_i)
                if prob == 0:
                    prob = p
                else:
                    prob *= p
        E += prob * ln_p_X_Z(X, Z)

    return E
```

Next, it was not immediately obvious to me how and why we're able to introduce a second integral sign on line 3 of the derivation above. Notwithstanding, the reason is quite simple; a simple exercise of nested for-loops is illustrative.

Before beginning, we remind the definition of an integral, in code. In the simplest example, $\int{ydx}$ can be written as:

```python
x = np.linspace(lower_lim, upper_lim, n_ticks)

integral = sum([y * dx for dx in x])
```

With this in mind, the following confirms the self-evidence of the second integral sign:

```python
TOTAL = 74.8
X = np.array([10, 20, 30])


def ln_p_X_Z(X, Z):
    return (X + Z).sum()  # dummy expression


# With one integral sign
total = 0
for Z_0 in q_0:
    for Z_1 in q_1:
        for Z_2 in q_2:
            val_z_0, prob_z_0 = Z_0
            val_z_1, prob_z_1 = Z_1
            val_z_2, prob_z_2 = Z_2
            Z = np.array([val_z_0, val_z_1, val_z_2])
            total += prob_z_0 * prob_z_1 * prob_z_2 * ln_p_X_Z(X, Z)


assert total == TOTAL


# With two integral signs
total = 0
for Z_0 in q_0:
    _total = 0
    val_z_0, prob_z_0 = Z_0
    for Z_1 in q_1:
        for Z_2 in q_2:
            val_z_1, prob_z_1 = Z_1
            val_z_2, prob_z_2 = Z_2
            Z = np.array([val_z_0, val_z_1, val_z_2])
            _total += prob_z_1 * prob_z_2 * ln_p_X_Z(X, Z)
    total += prob_z_0 * _total


assert total == TOTAL
```

In effect, isolating $q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)$ is akin to multiplying penultimate line, i.e. multiplying this probability by an intermediate summation.  Therefore, the second integral sign is akin `_total += prob_z_1 * prob_z_2 * ln_p_X_Z(X, Z)`, i.e. the mechanism that computes this intermediate summation itself.

## Second

Next, let's expand $B$. We note that this is the entropy of the full variational distribution $q(\mathbf{Z})$.

$$
\begin{align*}
B
&= - \int{q(\mathbf{Z})\log{q(\mathbf{Z})}}d\mathbf{Z}\\
&= - \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg]\\
&= - \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{\prod\limits_{i}q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)}\bigg]\\
&= - \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\sum\limits_{i}\log{q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)}\bigg]\\
&= - \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)} + \sum\limits_{i \neq j}\log{q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)}\bigg]\\
&= - \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}\bigg] - \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\sum\limits_{i \neq j}\log{q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)}\bigg]\\
&= - \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}\bigg[\log{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}\bigg] - \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q_{i \neq j}(\mathbf{Z}_i)}\bigg[\sum\limits_{i \neq j}\log{q_i(\mathbf{Z}_i)}\bigg]\\
&= - \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}\bigg[\log{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}\bigg] + \text{const}\\
&= - \int{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)\log{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}}d\mathbf{Z}_j + \text{const}\\
\end{align*}
$$

As we'll be maximizing w.r.t. just $q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)$, we can set all terms that don't include this factor to constants.

## Putting it back together

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{\frac{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}{q(\mathbf{Z})}}\bigg]
&= A + B\\
&= \int{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j){ \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}] }d\mathbf{Z}_j} - \int{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)\log{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}}d\mathbf{Z}_j + \text{const}\\
\end{align*}
$$

It would be great if we could remove the expectation, as the entire expression could be rewritten as a negative KL-divergence!

Acknowledging that the $\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]$ term in the integrand is an unnormalized log-likelihood written as a function of $\mathbf{Z}_j$, and stomaching one final pseudonym, we temporarily rewrite it as:

$$
\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}] = \log{\tilde{p}(\mathbf{X}, \mathbf{Z}_j})
$$

Then:

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{q(\mathbf{Z})}\bigg[\log{\frac{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}{q(\mathbf{Z})}}\bigg]
&= \int{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j){ \log{\tilde{p}(\mathbf{X}, \mathbf{Z}_j}) }d\mathbf{Z}_j} - \int{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)\log{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}}d\mathbf{Z}_j + \text{const}\\
&= \int{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j){ \log{\frac{\tilde{p}(\mathbf{X}, \mathbf{Z}_j)}{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}} }d\mathbf{Z}_j} + \text{const}\\
&= - \text{KL}\big(q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)\Vert \tilde{p}(\mathbf{X}, \mathbf{Z}_j)\big) + \text{const}\\
\end{align*}
$$

Finally, this expression, i.e. the ELBO, reaches its minimum when:

$$
\begin{align*}
q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)
&= \tilde{p}(\mathbf{X}, \mathbf{Z}_j)\\
&= \exp{\bigg(\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]\bigg)}
\end{align*}
$$

## Normalization constant

Nearing the end, we note that this density function is not necessarily normalized. "By inspection," we compute:

$$
\begin{align*}
q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)
&= \frac{\exp{\bigg(\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]\bigg)}}{\int{\exp{\bigg(\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]\bigg)}d\mathbf{Z}_j}}\\
&= \exp{\bigg(\mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}]\bigg)} + \text{const}\\
\end{align*}
$$

So, finally, to work with the log:

$$
\begin{align*}
\log{q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)}
&= \mathop{\mathbb{E}}_{i \neq j}[\log{p(\mathbf{X, Z})}] + \text{const}\\
\end{align*}
$$

## How to actually compute this thing

When actually applying mean-field, we are computing this expression analytically. *Therefore, to "obtain the optimal log-density function," we effectively strive to recognize the right-hand side of the equation as of the form of some canonical density function, along with its parameters.* Should it not, we try to rewrite it as such.

In practice, <clean up> certain types of families guarantee well formed results</clean up>

# Approximating a Gaussian

Remember, maximizing the ELBO (which we do by minimizing the KL divergence between  $q_j(\mathbf{Z}_j)$ and $\tilde{p}(\mathbf{X}, \mathbf{Z}_j)$ for all factors $j$) is our mechanism for minimizing the KL divergence between the full factorized posterior $q(\mathbf{Z})$ and the true posterior $p(\mathbf{Z}\vert\mathbf{X})$.

Reread this. Let it sink in!

![png]({filename}/figures/mean-field-variational-bayes/mv-gaussian-approx-1.png)

![png]({filename}/figures/mean-field-variational-bayes/mv-gaussian-approx-2.png)

![png]({filename}/figures/mean-field-variational-bayes/mv-gaussian-approx-3.png)

## Code
The [repository](https://github.com/cavaunpeu/boltzmann-machines) and [rendered notebook](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/cavaunpeu/boltzmann-machines/blob/master/boltzmann-machines-part-2.ipynb) for this project can be found at their respective links.

## References
[^1]: @book{Goodfellow-et-al-2016,
    title={Deep Learning},
    author={Ian Goodfellow and Yoshua Bengio and Aaron Courville},
    publisher={MIT Press},
    note={\url{http://www.deeplearningbook.org}},
    year={2016}
}
[^2]: [Adversarial Contrastive Estimation](https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.03642)
