content/machine-learning/neural-sbi.md, before:

Title: Neural Methods in Simulator-Based Inference
Date: 2021-12-27 09:00
Author: Will Wolf
Lang: en
Slug: neural-methods-in-sbi
Status: published
Summary: A survey of how neural networks are currently being used in simulator-based inference routines.
Image:

Bayesian inference is the task of quantifying a posterior belief over parameters $\boldsymbol{\theta}$ given observed data $\mathbf{x}$—where $\mathbf{x}$ was generated from a model $p(\mathbf{x}\vert{\boldsymbol{\theta}})$—via Bayes' Theorem:

$
    p(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x}) = \frac{p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{\theta})}{p(\mathbf{x})}
$

In numerous applications of scientific interest, e.g. cosmological, climatic or urban-mobility phenomena, the likelihood of the data $\mathbf{x}$ under the data-generating function $p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$ is intractable to compute, precluding classical inference approaches. Notwithstanding, *simulating* new data $\mathbf{x}$ from this function is often trivial—for example, by coding the generative process in a few lines of Python—

```python
def generative_process(params):
    data = ...  # some deterministic logic
    data = ...  # some stochastic logic
    data = ...  # whatever you want!
    return data

simulated_data = [generative_process(p) for p in [.2, .4, .6, .8, 1]]
```

—motivating the study of *simulation-based* Bayesian *inference* methods, termed SBI.

Furthermore, the evidence $p(\mathbf{x}) = \int{p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{\theta})}d\boldsymbol{\theta}$ is typically intractable to compute as well. This is because the integral has no closed-form solution; or, were the functional form of the likelihood (which we don't have) and the prior (which we do have) available, expanding these terms yields a summation over an "impractically large" number of terms, e.g. the number of possible cluster assignment configurations in a mixture of Gaussians [6]. For this reason, in SBI, we typically estimate the *unnormalized* posterior $\hat{p}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x}) = p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$.

Recent work has explored the use of neural networks to perform key density estimation tasks, i.e. subroutines, of the SBI routine itself. We refer to this work as Neural SBI. In the following sections, we detail the various classes of these estimation tasks. For a more thorough analysis of their respective motivations, behaviors, and tradeoffs, we refer the reader to the original work.

# Neural Posterior Estimation

In this class of models, we estimate $\hat{p}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x})$ with a conditional neural density estimator $q_{\phi}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x})$. Simply, this estimator is a neural network with parameters $\phi$ that accepts $\mathbf{x}$ as input and produces $\boldsymbol{\theta}$ as output. It is trained on data tuples $\{\boldsymbol{\theta}_n, \mathbf{x}_n\}_{1:N}$ sampled from $p(\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta}) = p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$, where $p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$ is a prior we choose, and $p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$ is our *simulator*. For example, we can construct this training set as follows:

```python
data = []

theta = prior.sample()
x = generative_process(params=theta)

data.append((x, theta))
```

Then, we train our network.

```python
q_phi.train(data)
```

Finally, once trained, we can estimate $\hat{p}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x} = \mathbf{x}_o)$—our posterior belief over parameters $\boldsymbol{\theta}$ given our *observed* (not simulated!) data $\mathbf{x}_o$ as $\hat{p}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x}_o) = q_{\phi}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x} = \mathbf{x}_o)$.

## Learning the wrong estimator

Ultimately, our goal is to perform the following computation:

$$
q_{\phi}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x} = \mathbf{x}_o)
$$

Such that $q_{\phi}$ produces an *accurate* estimation of the parameters $\boldsymbol{\theta}$ given observed data $\mathbf{x}_o$, we require that $q_{\phi}$ be *trained* on tuples $\{\boldsymbol{\theta}_n, \mathbf{x}_n\}$ where:

1. $\mathbf{x}_n \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_n)$ via our simulation step.
2. $\vert\mathbf{x}_n - \mathbf{x}_o\vert$ is small, i.e. our simulated are nearby our observed data.

Otherwise, $q_{\phi}$ will learn estimator a posterior over parameters given data *unlike* our own.

## Learning a better estimator

So, how do we obtain parameters $\boldsymbol{\theta}_n$ that produce $\mathbf{x}_n \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_n)$ near $\mathbf{x}_o$? We take those that have high (estimated) posterior density given $\mathbf{x}_o$!

In this vein, we build our training set as follows:

```python
data = []

theta = q_phi(x=x_o).sample()
x = generative_process(params=theta)

data.append((x, theta))
```

Stitching this all together, our SBI routine looks as follows:

```python
for r in range(N_ROUNDS):
    data = []
    for _ in range(N_SAMPLES):
        if e == 0:
            theta = prior.sample()
        else:
            theta = q_phi(x=x_o).sample()
        x = generative_process(params=theta)

        data.append((x, theta))
    q_phi.train(data)

posterior_samples = [q_phi(x=x_o).sample() for _ in range(ANY_NUMBER)]
```

## Learning the right estimator

Unfortunately, we're still left with a problem:

1. In the first round, we learn $q_{\phi, r=0}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x}) \approx p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$, i.e. the **right** estimator.
2. Otherwise, we learn $q_{\phi, r}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x}) \approx p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})q_{\phi, r-1}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x})$, i.e. the **wrong** estimator.

So, how do we correct this mistake?

In [2], the authors adjust the learned posterior $q_{\phi, r}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x})$ by simply dividing it by $q_{\phi, r-1}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x})$ then multiplying it by $p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$. Furthermore, as they choose $q_{\phi}$ to be a *Mixture Density Network*—a neural network which outputs the parameters of a mixture of Gaussians—and the prior to be "simple distribution (uniform or Gaussian, as is typically the case in practice)," this adjustment can be done analytically.

Conversely, the authors in [3] *train* $q_{\phi}$ on a target *reweighted* to similar effect: instead of maximizing the total (log) likelihood $\Sigma_{n} \log q_{\phi}(\boldsymbol{\theta}_n\vert\mathbf{x}_n)$, they maximize $\Sigma_{n} \log w_n q_{\phi}(\boldsymbol{\theta}_n\vert\mathbf{x}_n)$, where $w_n = \frac{p(\boldsymbol{\theta}_n)}{q_{\phi, r-1}(\boldsymbol{\theta}_n\vert\mathbf{x}_n)}$.

While both approaches carry further nuance and potential pitfalls, they bring us effective methods for using a neural network to directly estimate a faithful posterior in SBI routines.

# Neural Likelihood Estimation

In neural likelihood estimation (NLE), we use a neural network to directly estimate the (intractable) likelihood function of the simulator $p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$ itself. We denote this estimator $q_{\phi}(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$. Finally, we compute our desired posterior as $\hat{p}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x}_o) = q_{\phi}(\mathbf{x}_o\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$.

Similar to Neural Posterior Estimation (NPE) approaches, we'd like to learn our estimator on inputs $\boldsymbol{\theta}$ that produce $\mathbf{x}_n \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_n)$ near $\mathbf{x}_o$. To do this, we again sample them from regions of high approximate posterior density. In each round $r$, in NPE, this posterior was $q_{\phi, r-1}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x} = \mathbf{x}_o)$; in NLE, it is $q_{\phi, r-1}(\mathbf{x}_o\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$. In both cases, we draw samples from our approximate posterior density, then feed them to the simulator to generate novel data for training our estimator $q_{\phi}$.

For a more detailed treatment, please refer to original works [4], [5] (among others).

# Neural Likelihood Ratio Estimation

In this final class of models, we instead try to directly draw *samples* from the true posterior itself. However, since we can't compute $p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$ nor $p(\mathbf{x})$, we first need a sampling algorithm that satisifes our constraints. One such class of algorithms is *Markov chain Monte Carlo*, termed MCMC.

In MCMC, we first *propose* parameter samples $\boldsymbol{\theta}_i$ from a proposal distribution. Then, we evaluate their *fitness* by asking the question: "does this sample $\boldsymbol{\theta}_i$ have higher posterior density than the previous sample $\boldsymbol{\theta}_j$ we drew?" Generally, this question is answered through comparison, e.g.

$$
\frac{
    p(\boldsymbol{\theta}_i\vert\mathbf{x})
} {
    p(\boldsymbol{\theta}_{j}\vert\mathbf{x})
} = \frac{
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i)p(\boldsymbol{\theta}_i) / p(\mathbf{x})
} {
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_j)p(\boldsymbol{\theta}_j) / p(\mathbf{x})
}
$$

Fortunately, the evidence terms $p(\mathbf{x})$ cancel, and the prior densities $p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$ are evaluable. Though we cannot compute the likelihood terms outright, we can estimate their *ratio* and proceed with MCMC as per normal. If $\frac{p(\boldsymbol{\theta}_i\vert\mathbf{x})}{p(\boldsymbol{\theta}_j\vert\mathbf{x})} \gt 1$, we (are likely to) *accept* $\boldsymbol{\theta}_i$ as a sample from our target posterior.

## Estimating the likelihood ratio

Let us term the likelihood ratio as

$$
r(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i, \boldsymbol{\theta}_j) = \frac{
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i)
} {
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_j)
}
$$

Ingeniously, [7] propose to learn a classifier to discriminate samples $\mathbf{x} \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i)$ from $\mathbf{x} \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_j)$, then use its predictions to compute to estimate $r(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i, \boldsymbol{\theta}_j)$.

To do this, we draw training samples $(\mathbf{x}, y=1) \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i)$ and $(\mathbf{x}, y=0) \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_j)$ then train a binary classifer $d(y\vert\mathbf{x})$ on this data. In this vein, a perfect classifier gives:

$$
\begin{align*}
d^*(y=1\vert\mathbf{x})
&= \frac{
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i)
} {
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i) + p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_j)
} \\
d^*(y=0\vert\mathbf{x})
&= \frac{
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_j)
} {
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i) + p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_j)
} \\
\end{align*}
$$

Consequently,

$$
\begin{align*}
r(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i, \boldsymbol{\theta}_j)
&= \frac{
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i)
} {
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_j)
} \\
&= \frac{
    d^*(y=1\vert\mathbf{x})
} {
    d^*(y=0\vert\mathbf{x})
} \\
&= \frac{
    d^*(y=1\vert\mathbf{x})
} {
    1 - d^*(y=1\vert\mathbf{x})
}
\end{align*}
$$

Since our classifier won't be perfect, we simply term it $d(y\vert\mathbf{x})$, where $\hat{r}(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i, \boldsymbol{\theta}_j) = \frac{d(y=1\vert\mathbf{x})}{1 - d(y=1\vert\mathbf{x})}$. With $\hat{r}(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i, \boldsymbol{\theta}_j)$ in hand, we can compare the posterior density of proposed samples $\boldsymbol{\theta}_i$ and $\boldsymbol{\theta}_j$ in our MCMC routine.

## Generalizing our classifier

To use the above classifier in our inference routine requires we *retrain* a *new* classifier for every *unique* set of parameters $\{\boldsymbol{\theta}_i\, \boldsymbol{\theta}_j\}$. Clearly, this is extremely impractical. How can we generalize our classifier such that we only have to train it once?

In [7], the authors learn a *single* classifier $d(y\vert\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta})$ to discriminate samples $\mathbf{x} \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$ from $\mathbf{x} \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_{ref})$, where $\boldsymbol{\theta}$ is an *arbitrary* parameter value, and $\boldsymbol{\theta}_{ref}$ is a fixed, *reference* parameter value. It is trained on data $(\mathbf{x},  \boldsymbol{\theta}, y=1) \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$ and $(\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta}_{ref},  y=0) \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_{ref})$. Once trained, it gives:

$$
r(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}, \boldsymbol{\theta}_{ref})
= \frac{
    d^*(y\vert\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta})
} {
    1 - d^*(y\vert\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta})
}
$$

Consequently,

$$
\begin{align*}
r(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i, \boldsymbol{\theta}_j)
&= \frac{
    r(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i, \boldsymbol{\theta}_{ref})
} {
    r(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_j, \boldsymbol{\theta}_{ref})
} \\
&= \frac{
    d^*(y\vert\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta}_i)
} {
    1 - d^*(y\vert\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta}_i)
} * \frac{
    1 - d^*(y\vert\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta}_j)
} {
    d^*(y\vert\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta}_j)
}
\end{align*}
$$

With *two* inference calls to a *single* model, we can now compare the density of two proposed posterior samples.

## References
```
1. @article{
    10.1073/pnas.1912789117,
    year = {2020},
    title = {{The frontier of simulation-based inference}},
    author = {Cranmer, Kyle and Brehmer, Johann and Louppe, Gilles},
    journal = {Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences},
    issn = {0027-8424},
    doi = {10.1073/pnas.1912789117},
    pmid = {32471948},
    pages = {30055--30062},
    number = {48},
    volume = {117}
}

2. @inproceedings{papamakarios2016,
    author = {Papamakarios, George and Murray, Iain},
    booktitle = {Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems},
    editor = {D. Lee and M. Sugiyama and U. Luxburg and I. Guyon and R. Garnett},
    pages = {},
    publisher = {Curran Associates, Inc.},
    title = {Fast $\epsilon$-free Inference of Simulation Models with Bayesian Conditional Density Estimation},
    url = {https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2016/file/6aca97005c68f1206823815f66102863-Paper.pdf},
    volume = {29},
    year = {2016}
}

3. @article{
    lueckmann2017,
    year = {2017},
    title = {{Flexible statistical inference for mechanistic models of neural dynamics}},
    author = {Lueckmann, Jan-Matthis and Goncalves, Pedro J and Bassetto, Giacomo and Öcal, Kaan and Nonnenmacher, Marcel and Macke, Jakob H},
    journal = {arXiv},
    eprint = {1711.01861},
}

4. @InProceedings{
    pmlr-v89-papamakarios19a,
    title = {Sequential Neural Likelihood: Fast Likelihood-free Inference with Autoregressive Flows},
    author = {Papamakarios, George and Sterratt, David and Murray, Iain},
    booktitle = {Proceedings of the Twenty-Second International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics},
    pages = {837--848},
    year = {2019},
    editor = {Chaudhuri, Kamalika and Sugiyama, Masashi},
    volume = {89},
    series = {Proceedings of Machine Learning Research},
    month = {16--18 Apr},
    publisher = {PMLR},
    pdf = {http://proceedings.mlr.press/v89/papamakarios19a/papamakarios19a.pdf},
    url = {http://proceedings.mlr.press/v89/papamakarios19a.html}
}

5. @InProceedings{
    pmlr-v96-lueckmann19a,
    title = {Likelihood-free inference with emulator networks},
    author = {Lueckmann, Jan-Matthis and Bassetto, Giacomo and Karaletsos, Theofanis and Macke, Jakob H.},
    booktitle = {Proceedings of The 1st Symposium on Advances in Approximate Bayesian Inference}, pages = {32--53}, year = {2019},
    editor = {Francisco Ruiz and Cheng Zhang and Dawen Liang and Thang Bui},
    volume = {96},
    series = {Proceedings of Machine Learning Research},
    address = {},
    month = {02 Dec},
    publisher = {PMLR},
    pdf = {http://proceedings.mlr.press/v96/lueckmann19a/lueckmann19a.pdf},
    url = {http://proceedings.mlr.press/v96/lueckmann19a.html}
}

6. @article{
    10.1080/01621459.2017.1285773,
    year = {2017},
    title = {{Variational Inference: A Review for Statisticians}},
    author = {Blei, David M. and Kucukelbir, Alp and McAuliffe, Jon D.},
    journal = {Journal of the American Statistical Association},
    issn = {0162-1459},
    doi = {10.1080/01621459.2017.1285773},
    eprint = {1601.00670},
    pages = {859--877},
    number = {518},
    volume = {112}
}

7. @article{
    year = {2015},
    title = {{Approximating Likelihood Ratios with Calibrated Discriminative Classifiers}},
    author = {Cranmer, Kyle and Pavez, Juan and Louppe, Gilles},
    journal = {arXiv},
    eprint = {1506.02169},
}
```

Commit message:

add Improving our generalized classifier section and conclusion

content/machine-learning/neural-sbi.md, after:

Title: Neural Methods in Simulator-Based Inference
Date: 2021-12-27 09:00
Author: Will Wolf
Lang: en
Slug: neural-methods-in-sbi
Status: published
Summary: A survey of how neural networks are currently being used in simulator-based inference routines.
Image:

Bayesian inference is the task of quantifying a posterior belief over parameters $\boldsymbol{\theta}$ given observed data $\mathbf{x}$—where $\mathbf{x}$ was generated from a model $p(\mathbf{x}\vert{\boldsymbol{\theta}})$—via Bayes' Theorem:

$
    p(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x}) = \frac{p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{\theta})}{p(\mathbf{x})}
$

In numerous applications of scientific interest, e.g. cosmological, climatic or urban-mobility phenomena, the likelihood of the data $\mathbf{x}$ under the data-generating function $p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$ is intractable to compute, precluding classical inference approaches. Notwithstanding, *simulating* new data $\mathbf{x}$ from this function is often trivial—for example, by coding the generative process in a few lines of Python—

```python
def generative_process(params):
    data = ...  # some deterministic logic
    data = ...  # some stochastic logic
    data = ...  # whatever you want!
    return data

simulated_data = [generative_process(p) for p in [.2, .4, .6, .8, 1]]
```

—motivating the study of *simulation-based* Bayesian *inference* methods, termed SBI.

Furthermore, the evidence $p(\mathbf{x}) = \int{p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{\theta})}d\boldsymbol{\theta}$ is typically intractable to compute as well. This is because the integral has no closed-form solution; or, were the functional form of the likelihood (which we don't have) and the prior (which we do have) available, expanding these terms yields a summation over an "impractically large" number of terms, e.g. the number of possible cluster assignment configurations in a mixture of Gaussians [6]. For this reason, in SBI, we typically estimate the *unnormalized* posterior $\hat{p}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x}) = p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$.

Recent work has explored the use of neural networks to perform key density estimation tasks, i.e. subroutines, of the SBI routine itself. We refer to this work as Neural SBI. In the following sections, we detail the various classes of these estimation tasks. For a more thorough analysis of their respective motivations, behaviors, and tradeoffs, we refer the reader to the original work.

# Neural Posterior Estimation

In this class of models, we estimate $\hat{p}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x})$ with a conditional neural density estimator $q_{\phi}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x})$. Simply, this estimator is a neural network with parameters $\phi$ that accepts $\mathbf{x}$ as input and produces $\boldsymbol{\theta}$ as output. It is trained on data tuples $\{\boldsymbol{\theta}_n, \mathbf{x}_n\}_{1:N}$ sampled from $p(\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta}) = p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$, where $p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$ is a prior we choose, and $p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$ is our *simulator*. For example, we can construct this training set as follows:

```python
data = []

theta = prior.sample()
x = generative_process(params=theta)

data.append((x, theta))
```

Then, we train our network.

```python
q_phi.train(data)
```

Finally, once trained, we can estimate $\hat{p}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x} = \mathbf{x}_o)$—our posterior belief over parameters $\boldsymbol{\theta}$ given our *observed* (not simulated!) data $\mathbf{x}_o$ as $\hat{p}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x}_o) = q_{\phi}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x} = \mathbf{x}_o)$.

## Learning the wrong estimator

Ultimately, our goal is to perform the following computation:

$$
q_{\phi}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x} = \mathbf{x}_o)
$$

Such that $q_{\phi}$ produces an *accurate* estimation of the parameters $\boldsymbol{\theta}$ given observed data $\mathbf{x}_o$, we require that $q_{\phi}$ be *trained* on tuples $\{\boldsymbol{\theta}_n, \mathbf{x}_n\}$ where:

1. $\mathbf{x}_n \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_n)$ via our simulation step.
2. $\vert\mathbf{x}_n - \mathbf{x}_o\vert$ is small, i.e. our simulated are nearby our observed data.

Otherwise, $q_{\phi}$ will learn estimator a posterior over parameters given data *unlike* our own.

## Learning a better estimator

So, how do we obtain parameters $\boldsymbol{\theta}_n$ that produce $\mathbf{x}_n \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_n)$ near $\mathbf{x}_o$? We take those that have high (estimated) posterior density given $\mathbf{x}_o$!

In this vein, we build our training set as follows:

```python
data = []

theta = q_phi(x=x_o).sample()
x = generative_process(params=theta)

data.append((x, theta))
```

Stitching this all together, our SBI routine looks as follows:

```python
for r in range(N_ROUNDS):
    data = []
    for _ in range(N_SAMPLES):
        if e == 0:
            theta = prior.sample()
        else:
            theta = q_phi(x=x_o).sample()
        x = generative_process(params=theta)

        data.append((x, theta))
    q_phi.train(data)

posterior_samples = [q_phi(x=x_o).sample() for _ in range(ANY_NUMBER)]
```

## Learning the right estimator

Unfortunately, we're still left with a problem:

1. In the first round, we learn $q_{\phi, r=0}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x}) \approx p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$, i.e. the **right** estimator.
2. Otherwise, we learn $q_{\phi, r}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x}) \approx p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})q_{\phi, r-1}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x})$, i.e. the **wrong** estimator.

So, how do we correct this mistake?

In [2], the authors adjust the learned posterior $q_{\phi, r}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x})$ by simply dividing it by $q_{\phi, r-1}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x})$ then multiplying it by $p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$. Furthermore, as they choose $q_{\phi}$ to be a *Mixture Density Network*—a neural network which outputs the parameters of a mixture of Gaussians—and the prior to be "simple distribution (uniform or Gaussian, as is typically the case in practice)," this adjustment can be done analytically.

Conversely, the authors in [3] *train* $q_{\phi}$ on a target *reweighted* to similar effect: instead of maximizing the total (log) likelihood $\Sigma_{n} \log q_{\phi}(\boldsymbol{\theta}_n\vert\mathbf{x}_n)$, they maximize $\Sigma_{n} \log w_n q_{\phi}(\boldsymbol{\theta}_n\vert\mathbf{x}_n)$, where $w_n = \frac{p(\boldsymbol{\theta}_n)}{q_{\phi, r-1}(\boldsymbol{\theta}_n\vert\mathbf{x}_n)}$.

While both approaches carry further nuance and potential pitfalls, they bring us effective methods for using a neural network to directly estimate a faithful posterior in SBI routines.

# Neural Likelihood Estimation

In neural likelihood estimation (NLE), we use a neural network to directly estimate the (intractable) likelihood function of the simulator $p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$ itself. We denote this estimator $q_{\phi}(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$. Finally, we compute our desired posterior as $\hat{p}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x}_o) = q_{\phi}(\mathbf{x}_o\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$.

Similar to Neural Posterior Estimation (NPE) approaches, we'd like to learn our estimator on inputs $\boldsymbol{\theta}$ that produce $\mathbf{x}_n \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_n)$ near $\mathbf{x}_o$. To do this, we again sample them from regions of high approximate posterior density. In each round $r$, in NPE, this posterior was $q_{\phi, r-1}(\boldsymbol{\theta}\vert\mathbf{x} = \mathbf{x}_o)$; in NLE, it is $q_{\phi, r-1}(\mathbf{x}_o\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$. In both cases, we draw samples from our approximate posterior density, then feed them to the simulator to generate novel data for training our estimator $q_{\phi}$.

For a more detailed treatment, please refer to original works [4], [5] (among others).

# Neural Likelihood Ratio Estimation

In this final class of models, we instead try to directly draw *samples* from the true posterior itself. However, since we can't compute $p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$ nor $p(\mathbf{x})$, we first need a sampling algorithm that satisifes our constraints. One such class of algorithms is *Markov chain Monte Carlo*, termed MCMC.

In MCMC, we first *propose* parameter samples $\boldsymbol{\theta}_i$ from a proposal distribution. Then, we evaluate their *fitness* by asking the question: "does this sample $\boldsymbol{\theta}_i$ have higher posterior density than the previous sample $\boldsymbol{\theta}_j$ we drew?" Generally, this question is answered through comparison, e.g.

$$
\frac{
    p(\boldsymbol{\theta}_i\vert\mathbf{x})
} {
    p(\boldsymbol{\theta}_{j}\vert\mathbf{x})
} = \frac{
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i)p(\boldsymbol{\theta}_i) / p(\mathbf{x})
} {
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_j)p(\boldsymbol{\theta}_j) / p(\mathbf{x})
}
$$

Fortunately, the evidence terms $p(\mathbf{x})$ cancel, and the prior densities $p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$ are evaluable. Though we cannot compute the likelihood terms outright, we can estimate their *ratio* and proceed with MCMC as per normal. If $\frac{p(\boldsymbol{\theta}_i\vert\mathbf{x})}{p(\boldsymbol{\theta}_j\vert\mathbf{x})} \gt 1$, we (are likely to) *accept* $\boldsymbol{\theta}_i$ as a sample from our target posterior.

## Estimating the likelihood ratio

Let us term the likelihood ratio as

$$
r(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i, \boldsymbol{\theta}_j) = \frac{
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i)
} {
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_j)
}
$$

Ingeniously, [7] propose to learn a classifier to discriminate samples $\mathbf{x} \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i)$ from $\mathbf{x} \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_j)$, then use its predictions to compute to estimate $r(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i, \boldsymbol{\theta}_j)$.

To do this, we draw training samples $(\mathbf{x}, y=1) \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i)$ and $(\mathbf{x}, y=0) \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_j)$ then train a binary classifer $d(y\vert\mathbf{x})$ on this data. In this vein, a perfect classifier gives:

$$
\begin{align*}
d^*(y=1\vert\mathbf{x})
&= \frac{
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i)
} {
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i) + p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_j)
} \\
d^*(y=0\vert\mathbf{x})
&= \frac{
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_j)
} {
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i) + p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_j)
} \\
\end{align*}
$$

Consequently,

$$
\begin{align*}
r(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i, \boldsymbol{\theta}_j)
&= \frac{
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i)
} {
    p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_j)
} \\
&= \frac{
    d^*(y=1\vert\mathbf{x})
} {
    d^*(y=0\vert\mathbf{x})
} \\
&= \frac{
    d^*(y=1\vert\mathbf{x})
} {
    1 - d^*(y=1\vert\mathbf{x})
}
\end{align*}
$$

Since our classifier won't be perfect, we simply term it $d(y\vert\mathbf{x})$, where $\hat{r}(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i, \boldsymbol{\theta}_j) = \frac{d(y=1\vert\mathbf{x})}{1 - d(y=1\vert\mathbf{x})}$. With $\hat{r}(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i, \boldsymbol{\theta}_j)$ in hand, we can compare the posterior density of proposed samples $\boldsymbol{\theta}_i$ and $\boldsymbol{\theta}_j$ in our MCMC routine.

## Generalizing our classifier

To use the above classifier in our inference routine requires we *retrain* a *new* classifier for every *unique* set of parameters $\{\boldsymbol{\theta}_i\, \boldsymbol{\theta}_j\}$. Clearly, this is extremely impractical. How can we generalize our classifier such that we only have to train it once?

In [7], the authors learn a *single* classifier $d(y\vert\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta})$ to discriminate samples $\mathbf{x} \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$ from $\mathbf{x} \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_{ref})$, where $\boldsymbol{\theta}$ is an *arbitrary* parameter value, and $\boldsymbol{\theta}_{ref}$ is a fixed, *reference* parameter value. It is trained on data $(\mathbf{x},  \boldsymbol{\theta}, y=1) \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$ and $(\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta}_{ref},  y=0) \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_{ref})$. Once trained, it gives:

$$
r(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}, \boldsymbol{\theta}_{ref})
= \frac{
    d^*(y\vert\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta})
} {
    1 - d^*(y\vert\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta})
}
$$

Consequently,

$$
\begin{align*}
r(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i, \boldsymbol{\theta}_j)
&= \frac{
    r(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_i, \boldsymbol{\theta}_{ref})
} {
    r(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_j, \boldsymbol{\theta}_{ref})
} \\
&= \frac{
    d^*(y\vert\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta}_i)
} {
    1 - d^*(y\vert\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta}_i)
} * \frac{
    1 - d^*(y\vert\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta}_j)
} {
    d^*(y\vert\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta}_j)
}
\end{align*}
$$

With *two* inference calls to a *single* model, we can now compare the density of two proposed posterior samples.

## Improving our generalized classifier

Once more, our classifier $d(y\vert\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta})$ discriminates samples $\mathbf{x} \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$ from $\mathbf{x} \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_{ref})$. In this vein, in the case that a given $\mathbf{x}$ was drawn from neither $p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$ *nor* $p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_{ref})$, what should our classifier do? In [8], the authors illustrate this problem:

![png]({static}/figures/neural-sbi/undefined-classifier.png)

stressing that "poor inference results occur in the absence of support between $p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$ and $p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta}_{ref})$."

In solution, they propose to learn a (neural) classifier that instead discriminates between *dependent* sample-parameter pairs $(\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta}) \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$ from *independent* sample-parameter pairs $(\mathbf{x}, \boldsymbol{\theta}) \sim p(\mathbf{x})p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$. Since $p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$ and $p(\mathbf{x})p(\boldsymbol{\theta})$ occupy the same space, they share a common support. In other words, the likelihood of a given $\mathbf{x}$ will *always* be positive for *some* $\boldsymbol{\theta}$ in the figure above.

# Conclusion

Simulation-based inference is a class of techniques that allows us to perform Bayesian inference in the absence of a tractable likelihood function $p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$, but from which we can simulate new data $\mathbf{x} \sim p(\mathbf{x}\vert\boldsymbol{\theta})$. In the above sections, we detailed several SBI approaches, and ways in which neural networks are currently being used in each.

## References
```
1. @article{
    10.1073/pnas.1912789117,
    year = {2020},
    title = {{The frontier of simulation-based inference}},
    author = {Cranmer, Kyle and Brehmer, Johann and Louppe, Gilles},
    journal = {Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences},
    issn = {0027-8424},
    doi = {10.1073/pnas.1912789117},
    pmid = {32471948},
    pages = {30055--30062},
    number = {48},
    volume = {117}
}

2. @inproceedings{papamakarios2016,
    author = {Papamakarios, George and Murray, Iain},
    booktitle = {Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems},
    editor = {D. Lee and M. Sugiyama and U. Luxburg and I. Guyon and R. Garnett},
    pages = {},
    publisher = {Curran Associates, Inc.},
    title = {Fast $\epsilon$-free Inference of Simulation Models with Bayesian Conditional Density Estimation},
    url = {https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2016/file/6aca97005c68f1206823815f66102863-Paper.pdf},
    volume = {29},
    year = {2016}
}

3. @article{
    lueckmann2017,
    year = {2017},
    title = {{Flexible statistical inference for mechanistic models of neural dynamics}},
    author = {Lueckmann, Jan-Matthis and Goncalves, Pedro J and Bassetto, Giacomo and Öcal, Kaan and Nonnenmacher, Marcel and Macke, Jakob H},
    journal = {arXiv},
    eprint = {1711.01861},
}

4. @InProceedings{
    pmlr-v89-papamakarios19a,
    title = {Sequential Neural Likelihood: Fast Likelihood-free Inference with Autoregressive Flows},
    author = {Papamakarios, George and Sterratt, David and Murray, Iain},
    booktitle = {Proceedings of the Twenty-Second International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics},
    pages = {837--848},
    year = {2019},
    editor = {Chaudhuri, Kamalika and Sugiyama, Masashi},
    volume = {89},
    series = {Proceedings of Machine Learning Research},
    month = {16--18 Apr},
    publisher = {PMLR},
    pdf = {http://proceedings.mlr.press/v89/papamakarios19a/papamakarios19a.pdf},
    url = {http://proceedings.mlr.press/v89/papamakarios19a.html}
}

5. @InProceedings{
    pmlr-v96-lueckmann19a,
    title = {Likelihood-free inference with emulator networks},
    author = {Lueckmann, Jan-Matthis and Bassetto, Giacomo and Karaletsos, Theofanis and Macke, Jakob H.},
    booktitle = {Proceedings of The 1st Symposium on Advances in Approximate Bayesian Inference}, pages = {32--53}, year = {2019},
    editor = {Francisco Ruiz and Cheng Zhang and Dawen Liang and Thang Bui},
    volume = {96},
    series = {Proceedings of Machine Learning Research},
    address = {},
    month = {02 Dec},
    publisher = {PMLR},
    pdf = {http://proceedings.mlr.press/v96/lueckmann19a/lueckmann19a.pdf},
    url = {http://proceedings.mlr.press/v96/lueckmann19a.html}
}

6. @article{
    10.1080/01621459.2017.1285773,
    year = {2017},
    title = {{Variational Inference: A Review for Statisticians}},
    author = {Blei, David M. and Kucukelbir, Alp and McAuliffe, Jon D.},
    journal = {Journal of the American Statistical Association},
    issn = {0162-1459},
    doi = {10.1080/01621459.2017.1285773},
    eprint = {1601.00670},
    pages = {859--877},
    number = {518},
    volume = {112}
}

7. @article{
    year = {2015},
    title = {{Approximating Likelihood Ratios with Calibrated Discriminative Classifiers}},
    author = {Cranmer, Kyle and Pavez, Juan and Louppe, Gilles},
    journal = {arXiv},
    eprint = {1506.02169},
}

8. @article{
    hermans2019,
    year = {2019},
    title = {{Likelihood-free MCMC with Amortized Approximate Ratio Estimators}},
    author = {Hermans, Joeri and Begy, Volodimir and Louppe, Gilles},
    journal = {arXiv},
    eprint = {1903.04057},
}
```
