content/pages/about.md, before:

Title: About
Date: 2014-04-24 17:38
Author: Will Wolf
Lang: en
Slug: about
Status: published
Template: page

Hi! My name's Will. I'm equal parts: **technologist, bookworm, polyglot, cyclist, optimist, traveler**.

**Broadly, my story is as follows:**

- `[2005-2010]` I was a **semi-professional internet poker player.** From age 15-20, I methodically built $50 into $150,000 through hard work and the help of terrific peers. In addition, I coached players from around the world via Skype.
- `[2007-2011]` I studied **industrial engineering and mathematics** at Penn State University as a member of the Schreyer Honors College.
- `[2012-2014]` I completed a **26.5-month solo backpacking and cycling [trip](http://www.willtravellife.com) around the world**, visiting over 40 countries on 5 continents. As highlights, I: traveled overland from Sweden to Côte D’Ivoire; taught university Spanish and middle school Physics (in French) in Guinea-Conakry; rode a [bicycle](http://willtravellife.com/category/will-bikes-central-asia/) 7,600 kilometers from Turkey to Kyrgyzstan through the Caucasus and Central Asian “Stans."
- `[2014-2016]` After **teaching myself topics in machine learning** and software engineering, I worked at [LiveAuctioneers](https://www.liveauctioneers.com) and [ShopKeep](https://www.shopkeep.com) in data science roles.
- `[2016-2017]` I quit my job and **moved to Casablanca, Morocco to pursue an Open-Source ["Master's"]({filename}/life/my-open-source-machine-learning-masters-in-casablanca-morocco.md)** in machine learning and statistics—a full-time, self-curated schedule of textbooks, MOOCs, publishing code to my [GitHub](https://github.com/cavaunpeu) and writing to this blog.
- `[2017-2021]` I [joined ASAPP]({filename}/life/joining-asapp.md) as a machine learning engineer, then researcher, then machine learning engineer. My work spanned **pure NLP research, applied NLP research, engineering and product.**
- `[2021-present]` I left ASAPP. I'm taking some time to [explore]({filename}/life/exploring-crypto.md)!

**Presently, I spend my time on:**

- `Crypto` I'm taking some time to [explore]({filename}/life/exploring-crypto.md) **Rust**, smart-contract development in Solana, **complex systems**, and their applications to the **crypto** space at large.

- `Language` I love learning and speaking foreign languages. I'm a longtime speaker of **[Spanish](http://willwolf.io/es/)** and **French**. At present, I'm voraciously learning **Russian**.

**To get in touch, please see the contact links below.**

Will

Commit message:

re-add reading section to about page

content/pages/about.md, after:

Title: About
Date: 2014-04-24 17:38
Author: Will Wolf
Lang: en
Slug: about
Status: published
Template: page

Hi! My name's Will. I'm equal parts: **technologist, bookworm, polyglot, cyclist, optimist, traveler**.

**Broadly, my story is as follows:**

- `[2005-2010]` I was a **semi-professional internet poker player.** From age 15-20, I methodically built $50 into $150,000 through hard work and the help of terrific peers. In addition, I coached players from around the world via Skype.
- `[2007-2011]` I studied **industrial engineering and mathematics** at Penn State University as a member of the Schreyer Honors College.
- `[2012-2014]` I completed a **26.5-month solo backpacking and cycling [trip](http://www.willtravellife.com) around the world**, visiting over 40 countries on 5 continents. As highlights, I: traveled overland from Sweden to Côte D’Ivoire; taught university Spanish and middle school Physics (in French) in Guinea-Conakry; rode a [bicycle](http://willtravellife.com/category/will-bikes-central-asia/) 7,600 kilometers from Turkey to Kyrgyzstan through the Caucasus and Central Asian “Stans."
- `[2014-2016]` After **teaching myself topics in machine learning** and software engineering, I worked at [LiveAuctioneers](https://www.liveauctioneers.com) and [ShopKeep](https://www.shopkeep.com) in data science roles.
- `[2016-2017]` I quit my job and **moved to Casablanca, Morocco to pursue an Open-Source ["Master's"]({filename}/life/my-open-source-machine-learning-masters-in-casablanca-morocco.md)** in machine learning and statistics—a full-time, self-curated schedule of textbooks, MOOCs, publishing code to my [GitHub](https://github.com/cavaunpeu) and writing to this blog.
- `[2017-2021]` I [joined ASAPP]({filename}/life/joining-asapp.md) as a machine learning engineer, then researcher, then machine learning engineer. My work spanned **pure NLP research, applied NLP research, engineering and product.**
- `[2021-present]` I left ASAPP. I'm taking some time to [explore]({filename}/life/exploring-crypto.md)!

**Presently, I spend my time on:**

- `Crypto` I'm taking some time to [explore]({filename}/life/exploring-crypto.md) **Rust**, smart-contract development in Solana, **complex systems**, and their applications to the **crypto** space at large.

- `Language` I love learning and speaking foreign languages. I'm a longtime speaker of **[Spanish](http://willwolf.io/es/)** and **French**. At present, I'm voraciously learning **Russian**.

- `Reading` I read a lot of books. [Here's]({filename}/pages/books.md) a few from recent years.

**To get in touch, please see the contact links below.**

Will
